+++
date = "2017-11-30T00:03:21+00:00"
draft = true
title = "My Struggle With Schizophrenia"

+++
I have a secret. One that I hide from most people in my life. It is not that I have done something wrong. It is not that I have lied about anything. My secret is kept hidden because many people fear, stigmatize, and discredit people with my secret. My secret is that I have Schizophrenia.

Before I go into what Schizophrenia is or how it has effected my life I'd like to tell you a bit about myself. I am a Software Engineer at a wonderful company. I am well compensated for my work and I am lucky enough that I can live alone in New York City. I have many friends, some whom I am very close with. I have a wonderful girlfriend who I have been with for a year.  I live a full and rich life. But it wasn't always that way.

After my second suicide attempt at age 13 I spent a week in a children's psychiatric hospital. Upon release I was assigned a state appointed social worker who I would work with for many years to come. This was my first real encounter with the mental health system. I remember watching a woman screaming and hiding under a blanket in the emergency psych ward. I remember sleeping on a stretcher with the neon lights on in a locked observation room because the hospital did not have any beds for me. I remember being put into restraints for transfer to another hospital. I remember witnessing a stabbing and multiple fights from my brief stay in the inpatient unit. I remember a lot of things I wish I didn't.

Schizophrenia is a broad illness. In fact in recent editions of the DSM 5, the rule book for diagnosing mental illness, Schizophrenia is described on a spectrum. Schizophrenia can also be comorbid with other conditions. When Schizophrenia is comorbid with either Major Depression or Bipolar disorder this is called Schizoaffective disorder. Schizoaffective disorder is the intersection of mood illness and psychosis. Although people with depression and bipolar disorder can experience psychosis in periods of extreme mood fluctuation, people with schizoaffective disorder experience psychosis as a dominant part of their illness. To qualify for schizoaffective disorder you need to experience psychosis without mood fluctuations for at least 2 weeks.

Schizophrenia and Bipolar disorder, my two comorbid conditions express themselves differently depending on the patient. To sum up the symptoms of my condition briefly I experience high swings in mood, depressions that get so low I lose 20 pounds in a month and think about suicide. I also experience elevated moods where I feel like I can do anything, I get little sleep, grandiose thoughts, and exhibit reckless behaviors. To qualify for Schizoaffective disorder psychosis is the dominant player in my life. I have experienced delusions that I could read minds, paranoia thinking that the government was after me, or grandiosity that celebrities were infatuated with me and sending me letters in my neighbors mailboxes. By far the dominant feature of my illness is hallucinations. Even with my medication and therapy I still have auditory hallucinations almost daily. When I become very ill for a period of time I will also experience visual and tactile hallucinations.

These symptoms are quite debilitating. I started hearing voices when I was 13. I remember being terrified by the cacophony of incessant noises in my head. I remember growing paranoid that everyone I knew was after me, trying to lock me away in a hospital forever or kill me.

These beliefs and frequent mood swings caused me to exhibit strange and avoidant behavior. Between ages 13 and 16 I barely saw anyone other than family outside of school. I grew distant from many of my friends out of paranoia and the delusion that I could read their minds and all they thought of me was criticisms.

This continued throughout my high school years. I planned on killing myself at 18, luckily my social worker talked me down, nearly literally. My care givers and the guidance counselors at the school decided I wasn't fit for college. I spent most of my late teens struggling to stay alive and out of hospitals and jails as my psychosis grew worse and worse. I cycled through dozens of psychotropic medications and they would often work for a period of time then the symptoms would return. By the age of 19 I was on SSI disability and being told I should apply for food stamps and section 8 housing.  

Luckily with the support from my family and social worker I earned an online college degree and began to partake heavily in computer programming. I got a full time job as a Junior developer while most of my friends were still in college. My life began to shape up.

In 2016 my father passed away from his own struggles with mental illness and addiction. In an attempt to distance myself from my father and because my life seemed to be all in order after that.